---
layout: post
title: Brief notes on 2nd Research of Canal Feasibility
hide: false
---
(This is the post in english about the Workshop on Nicaragua's Canal Impact Study done by the Academy of Sciences of Nicaragua. For the spanish & original post click [here]({% post_url 2015-11-22-canal-ii %}), for the basic german version of it click [hier]({% post_url 2015-11-22-canal-ale %})

> #### How is possible for us _nicas_ to not being able to solve our own problems. Are we not creative enough? - Dr. Huete

People that have met me, knows that I'm not environmentaly-minded person, I'm ecologically conscious just for economics, social and sometimes moral reasons. On this point is my biggest complain about the idea of a Canal in Nicaragua: <del>it's a bad idea</del> it's one of the **WORST IDEAS** ever, for a country where history is full with [dictators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anastasio_Somoza_Debayle), [mercenaries](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Walker_(filibuster)) and [hard-line communism](http://es.scribd.com/doc/26899930/1980-La-Decada-Sandinista-en-Nicaragua#scribd) that says a lot about the country.

Ignoring the amount of "legal" problems on which this project should have never be even considered, the impacts of the canal need to be studied. On economic impact and my big interest, is that the canal is just not profitable, in fact Nicaragua would need to **charge twice as [Panama does, just to make the even line](http://worldif.economist.com/article/8/what-if-the-panama-canal-gets-a-rival-trench-warfare-in-nicaragua).**

Considering the most area of impact is a must, therefor the [Academy of Sciences of Nicaragua](http://www.cienciasdenicaragua.org/) presented the Second International Workshop on the Canal of Nicaragua. Participants and speakers from local and international universities as Rice, Konstanz, AZU among others, debated about these impacts on ecology, economy and biodiversity.([Here](http://www.laprensa.com.ni/2015/11/23/nacionales/1941313-estudio-no-es-util-para-decidir-sobre-el-canal) for more info abuot the participants)

Basically the analysis from the Environmental Impac Study done by HKND boils down to the following:

> More research is needed. Construction cannot continue.

In the following points, I will summarize the [four main keynotes](http://cienciasdenicaragua.org/index.php/noticias/blog-noticias/74-ii-taller-internacional-sobre-el-canal-interoceanico-por-nicaragua) that were used as main areas in the workshop:

- Water Reservoirs (Any dredging is wrong)

Drs. Salvador Montenegro and Katherine Vammen present the possible effects that [dredging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dredging) would have in the Nicaragua Lake. To create the necessary depth for ships that would pass through the canal one would have to dredge more than **two thirds (2/3)** of the Lake. 715 million tons would be excavated, that until today are without purpose and _luminosity_ of the Lake would severely change affecting the local ecosystem. Another point, if we were to take only 10% of the water reservoir of the Lake and nearby rivers would be more than enough for 200 litres per person a year in local consumption and would create a revenue of **631 Million USD a year** if exported.

- Biodiversity (Impossible that the canal helps conservation)

Nicaragua, has big natural reserves: Punta Gorda, Cerro Silva e **Indio Maíz**, with more than 318,000 hectares of protected land that could be affected. Summing everything up, Dr. Jorge Huete, estimates that close to **120,000 hectares would be destroyed**, of which 30% represent High Quality natural habitats. One of the points given by HKND, the company behind the project, is that the canal would benefit these reserves and help preserve them, entirely wrong. [Here for a detailed explanation of the dangers to biodiversity](http://www.nature.com/news/conservation-nicaragua-canal-could-wreak-environmental-ruin-1.14721). To me, Dr. Huete makes an extremely good affirmation, it's the quote at the beginning of the article. We, nicaraguans, with our errors and everything are more than capable to generate solutions.

- Economic Impact (We would do worse than if we didn't do it)

My favorite subject and which I will get deep latter on, with another post. Presented, with some technical difficulties, by Dr. Adolfo Acevedo. It compares the economic position of Panama from 1950 to 2009 and identifies situations which may be expected in Nicaragua. Basically the canal in Panama had **no** positive effect on Panama's GDP until 2000, year in which the US concesion on the canal expired. The earning scale improved but only for those working in the canal, and that helped to create a big imports market. These "benefit" also introduced a disadvantage, namely _Dutch disease_ (Foreign capital creates a rise on the rate and currency exchange hurting exports and debt. Part of the problem in 1997 Asian Tigers crisis, Venezuela with Hugo Chávez and more recently Brazil) and once the capital stops flowing in, the country suffers from loss on competitivity and quality of life. As I mentioned, I will go on more detail in this point, but also worth mentioning that the amount of jobs to created by Nicaragua's canal is highly fictitious (Assuming that HKND hires only local labor) and that the creation of a mega-project without plans to reform education and the economy will benefit very, very few people.

- Methodology (There's no plan with sufficient research)

With speaker Dr. Michael Hanemman from Arizona State University, the valuation and planification of mega-projects is a huge challenge. No matter the project type, a project this size has a lot of risks that must be assessed and evaluated correctly. Starting with the definition of **value**, **evaluation** and **public good** to establish well-thought empirical methods that would help us to the right valuation of project's impacts. These impacts are specially important when environment and ecosystems are involved and requires, besides the valuation, a scientific support of impacts. This type of method was "recently" introduced in big infrastructure projects in the US, the standard is a need and always changing, that cannot be left to a basic research like the one done by HKND. Dr. Hanemann has a great quote which is the essence of the workshop: "This type of preparation, including both a scientific analysis and a 'Plan B', and the research to back it up, is presently lacking for the Nicaragua Canal."

---

#### Conclusion

This is in big strokes, the main points debated on the canal and its environmental impact. There are more points regarding legal framework, financing, national sovereignty and international politics. Personaly, this project is not controversial anymore, is just bad for the country.

